>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 27: THE
PEOPLE'S POPE MEETS WITH
SURVIVORS OF SEXUAL ABUSE BY
PRIESTS AND WITH PRISONERS, AND
HOLDS A HUGE OUTDOOR MASS FOR
THE FAITHFUL.
AND TIME FOR SCHOOL: HOW JAPAN
FULFILLS THE PROMISE OF QUALITY
EDUCATION FOR ITS CHILDREN.
>> (translated): LEARNING NOT
TO RUN AWAY FROM DIFFICULT
SITUATIONS HAS DEFINITELY BEEN
MY BIGGEST ACHIEVEMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: ALSO, LOOKING AT
THE SUPERMOON IN TONIGHT'S SKY.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
IN PHILADELPHIA, POPE FRANCIS IS
IN THE FINAL HOURS OF HIS FIRST
EVER VISIT TO THE UNITED STATES.
AT A SEMINARY THIS MORNING, THE
POPE MET PRIVATELY WITH FIVE
SURVIVORS OF SEXUAL ABUSE BY
PRIESTS AND OTHERS.
FRANCIS APOLOGIZED TO VICTIMS,
SAYING, IN PART, "I AM
PROFOUNDLY SORRY THAT YOUR
INNOCENCE WAS VIOLATED BY THOSE
WHO YOU TRUSTED.
FOR THOSE WHO WERE ABUSED BY A
MEMBER OF THE CLERGY, I AM
DEEPLY SORRY FOR THE TIMES WHEN
YOU OR YOUR FAMILY SPOKE OUT, TO
REPORT THE ABUSE, BUT YOU WERE
NOT HEARD OR BELIEVED."
THE POPE LATER TOLD 300 BISHOPS
HE WAS "OVERWHELMED WITH SHAME"
FOR HOW SOME PRIESTS HAD
BEHAVED, AND HE PLEDGED "ZEALOUS
VIGILANCE" TO PROTECT CHILDREN.
>> (translated): CRIMES OF
SEXUAL ABUSE OF CHILDREN CANNOT
BE MAINTAINED IN SECRET FOR
LONGER, AND I COMMIT TO A
ZEALOUS OVERSIGHT FROM THE
CHURCH TO ENSURE THAT YOUTH ARE
PROTECTED AND THAT ALL THOSE
RESPONSIBLE WILL BE HELD
ACCOUNTABLE.
>> Sreenivasan: NEWSHOUR'S
STEPHEN FEE IS COVERING THE
POPE'S WEEKEND IN PHILADELPHIA
AND JOINS ME NOW TO DISCUSS THE
REST OF THE POPE'S DAY.
STEPHEN, HOW DID THE POPE
SPEND HIS LAST DAY HERE IN
THE U.S.?
>> YEAH, HARI, HE STARTED
THE MORNING OFF AT THE ST.
CHARLES SEMINARY WHERE HE
DISCUSSED MEETING WITH ABUSE
VICTIMS.
HE THEN CONTINUED ON TO A
PHILADELPHIA AREA CORRECTIONAL
FACILITY WHERE HE MET WITH
INMATES AND THEIR FAMILIES.
AND THEN HE CAPPED OFF THE DAY
HERE ON THE BENJAMIN FRANKLIN
PARKWAY IN THE CENTER OF
PHILADELPHIA TO JOIN
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
FAITHFUL FOR AN OPEN-AIR
MASS.
IT'S LIKELY THE LARGEST
GATHERING OF THIS, HIS 10th,
INTERNATIONAL JOURNEY AS
PONTIFF AND HIS FIRST SWING
THROUGH THE UNITED STATES.
>> Sreenivasan: STEPHEN,
WHAT MAKES THIS TRIP TO
PHILADELPHIA DIFFERENT FROM
HIS VISITS TO WASHINGTON
D.C. AND NEW YORK?
>> WELL, HARI, YOU KNOW, IN
THOSE PLACES ON CAPITOL HILL
AND THE HALLS OF THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY, HE WAS TALKING TO
WORLD LEADERS ABOUT ISSUES
OF GLOBAL INCOME INEQUALITY
AND CLIMATE CHANGE.
HERE THE POPE IS REALLY
ADDRESSING THE FAITHFUL.
AFTER ALL THE PURPORTED
REASON FOR HIS VISIT WAS THE
WORLD MEETING OF FAMILIES
HERE IN PHILADELPHIA.
AND THAT'S ESPECIALLY
MEANINGFUL FOR PHILADELPHIA
PHILAN THERE IS MORE THAN A
MILLION CATHOLICS HERE.
THE CITY WAS ALSO SHAKEN
DEEPLY BY THE SEXUAL ABUSE
SCANDAL.
IS THIS GOING TO BRING MORE
PEOPLE INTO THE PEWS IN
CHURCH EVERY SUNDAY, IS IT
GOING TO FORGIVE THE CRIMES
OF THE PAST, MAYBE, MAYBE
NOT.
BUT FOR THE PEOPLE WE MET
SINCE WE HAVE BEEN HERE FROM
AROUND THE COUNTRY, AROUND
THE WORLD, THIS IS REALLY
PUTTING A HUMAN FACE ON AN
INSTITUTION THAT NUMBERS
MORE THAN A BILLION MEMBERS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT'S THE
SECURITY SITUATION LIKE?
IS THAT DIFFERENT THAN THESE
OTHER CITIES?
>> YOU KNOW, I THINK SO,
HARI.
IT'S SORT OF A COMBINATION
OF A FESTIVAL ENVIRONMENT
AND TOTAL LOCKDOWN.
WE GOT HERE ON FRIDAY
AFTERNOON.
MAIN STREETS IN PHILADELPHIA
WERE ALREADY CLOSED DOWN TO
TRAFFIC.
THERE'S PEDESTRIANS OUT,
BIKES OUT.
WE WAITED WITH THE SECURITY
LINE ON THE WAY IN HERE
TODAY.
IT TOOK US TWO HOURS TO GET
IN.
THE LINE NEARLY DOUBLED BY
THE TIME WE WERE IN.
SO THERE'S A LOT OF LOCKDOWN
HERE IF PHILLIE.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY, WHEN
HE HEADS BACK TO ROME THIS
EVENING, WHAT'S NEXT FOR
HIM?
WHAT'S NEXT FOR THE CHURCH?
>> YEAH, WELL, HE'LL FLY OUT
OF HERE AND HE'LL MEET
BRIEFLY WITH VICE PRESIDENT
SWRO BIDEN.
AND WHEN HE RETURNS TO ROME
THE STORY CONTINUES.
BISHOPS IN THE VATICAN WILL
BE MEETING ON ISSUES OF THE
FAMILY IN THE COMING DIS.
THEY WILL BE TALKING ABOUT
SOME OF THOSE HOT-BUTTON
ISSUES WE HAVE BEEN TALKING
ABOUT, ABOUT MARRIAGE AND
DIVORCE AND ANNULMENT, ABOUT
THE INCLUSION OF GAYS AND
LESBIANS IN THE CHURCH AND
THE ISSUE OF WOMEN IN THE
CHURCH WHO STILL AREN'T
PERMITTED INTO THE CLERGY
AND ARE SELDOM FOUND IN THE
HIGHER ECHELONS OF POWER IN
THE CATHOLIC CHURCH.
IT'S AN IMPORTANT TIME FOR
THE POPE.
AFTER ALL DESPITE HIS OPEN
MESSAGE, HE'S STILL THE
LEADER OF THE CATHOLIC
CHURCH AND THEY'RE STILL
STRONG ESTABLISHMENT STRAINS
THEREMENT IT REMAINS TO BE
SEEN WHAT KIND OF MARK HE
WILL LEAVE DURING HIS PAPACY.
>> Sreenivasan: NEWSHOUR
STEPHEN FEE JOINING US FROM
PHILADELPHIA, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: FRANCE HAS
LAUNCHED ITS FIRST AIR STRIKES
AGAINST THE ISLAMIC STATE, OR
ISIS, INSIDE SYRIA.
FRENCH PRESIDENT FRANCOIS
HOLLANDE TOLD REPORTERS AT THE
UNITED NATIONS TODAY THAT JETS
DESTROYED A TRAINING CAMP FOR
ISIS MILITANTS WHO COULD HAVE
THREATENED THE SECURITY OF
FRANCE.
FRANCE HAS CONDUCTED 215 AIR
STRIKES ON ISIS POSITIONS INSIDE
IRAQ.
FRANCE AND THE UNITED STATES
WANT TO SEE SYRIAN PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD REMOVED FROM
POWER, BUT RUSSIA CONTINUES TO
ARM ASSAD IN SYRIA'S CIVIL WAR.
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADMIR PUTIN
SAID IN AN INTERVIEW WITH
CHARLIE ROSE RELEASED TODAY THAT
HE WANTS TO STRENGTHEN WHAT HE
CALLED "THE LEGITIMATE
GOVERNMENT OF SYRIA" TO ENSURE
STABILITY IN THE REGION.
PRESIDENT OBAMA MEETS PRESIDENT
PUTIN AT THE U.N. TOMORROW.
THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION
FOR MIGRATION SAYS 500,000
MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES FROM THE
MIDDLE EAST, AFRICA, AND ASIA,
HAVE NOW CROSSED THE
MEDITERRANEAN SEA FOR EUROPE
THIS YEAR, AND ALMOST 3,000
PEOPLE HAVE DIED TRYING.
17 REFUGEES FROM SYRIA DROWNED
OFF THE TURKISH COAST TODAY, AND
ANOTHER 20 WERE RESCUED AFTER
THEIR RAFTS HEADED FOR GREEK
ISLANDS SANK.
TODAY, GREECE FERRIED 4,000
MIGRANTS WHO MADE IT TO THE
ISLANDS TO THE MAINLAND, WHERE
THEY ARE EXPECTED TO SEEK ASYLUM
ELSEWHERE IN NORTHERN EUROPE.
AUSTRIA RECEIVED AT LEAST 12,000
MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES THIS
WEEKEND, MOST CROSSING AUSTRIA'S
BORDER WITH HUNGARY.
OUTGOING SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES JOHN BOEHNER
PREDICTS THERE WILL BE NO
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN.
BOEHNER SAID TODAY HE IS
CONFIDENT THE HOUSE AND SENATE
WILL PASS A SPENDING BILL BEFORE
THE NEW FISCAL YEAR BEGINS IN
FOUR DAYS.
BOEHNER, WHO ANNOUNCED FRIDAY HE
WILL RESIGN AS SPEAKER ON
OCTOBER 30, DEFENDED HIS RECORD
ON CBS's "FACE THE NATION."
>> WHETHER IT WAS THE LARGEST
DEFICIT REDUCTION DEAL IN THE
HISTORY OF THE COUNTRY, SAVING
$2.1 TRILLION, PROTECTING 99% OF
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE FROM AN
INCREASE IN OUR TAXES, OR THE
FIRST MAJOR ENTITLEMENT REFORMS
IN 20 YEARS, ALL DONE OVER LAST
FOUR-AND-A-HALF YEARS WITH A
DEMOCRAT PRESIDENT, AND ALL
VOTED AGAINST BY MY MOST
CONSERVATIVE MEMBERS, BECAUSE IT
WASN'T GOOD ENOUGH.
REALLY?
>> Sreenivasan: SWITZERLAND IS
THE FIRST COUNTRY TO SUSPEND
SALES OF VOLKSWAGEN CARS DUE TO
THE AUTOMAKER'S EMISSIONS TEST
CHEATING SCANDAL.
THE SWISS GOVERNMENT SAYS THE
SUSPENSION COULD AFFECT 180,000
UNSOLD DIESEL VEHICLES, BUT
MODELS ALREADY ON THE ROAD WOULD
NOT BE AFFECTED.
GERMANY AND THE U.K. ARE ALSO
CONDUCTING INVESTIGATIONS.
THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY DISCOVERED
VOLKSWAGEN HAD RIGGED CAR
COMPUTERS TO RELEASE FEWER
EMISSIONS DURING TESTS.
11 MILLION V.W. DIESEL CARS
BUILT SINCE 2008 ARE AFFECTED BY
THE SCANDAL.
PARIS IS CAR-FREE, FOR A DAY.
TODAY, THE FRENCH CAPITAL BANNED
ALL MOTOR VEHICLES IN THE CENTER
OF THE CITY, FROM 11:00 IN THE
MORNING UNTIL 6:00 THIS EVENING.
PEDESTRIANS, JOGGERS, AND
CYCLISTS DESCENDED ON THE
TRAFFIC-FREE CHAMPS-ELYSEES.
ONLY EMERGENCY VEHICLES AND
TAXIS WERE ALLOWED.
THE REASON: TO SET AN EXAMPLE OF
LESS AIR POLLUTION BEFORE PARIS
HOSTS THE NEXT U.N. CONFERENCE
ON CLIMATE CHANGE THIS DECEMBER.
AND COMING UP ON THE NEWSHOUR
TOMORROW, SEE MARGARET WARNER'S
INTERVIEW WITH EGYPTIAN
PRESIDENT ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI.
>> CAN YOU EXPLAIN TO THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE WHY SO MANY
YOUNG PRO-DEMOCRACY
ACTIVISTS HAVE BEEN ROUNDED
UP AND PUT IN PRISON?
IT'S HARD FOR AMERICANS TO
UNDERSTAND.
>> IT IS TRUE THAT AMERICANS
WON'T UNDERSTAND THAT EASILY.
WE ARE NOT A RICH COUNTRY.
THIS COUNTRY CANNOT AFFORD A
STATE OF INSTABILITY.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR THE PAST 12
YEARS, PBS HAS DOCUMENTED GLOBAL
EFFORTS TO IMPROVE THE
ENROLLMENT OF CHILDREN IN
PRIMARY SCHOOL.
THE SERIES OF STORIES, CALLED"
TIME FOR SCHOOL" HAS COINCIDED
WITH A UNITED NATIONS INITIATIVE
SEEKING TO DRIVE DOWN THE NUMBER
OF KIDS OUT OF SCHOOL FROM AN
ESTIMATED 100 MILLION TO ZERO.
THE INITIATIVE IS ABOUT HALFWAY
TO ITS GOAL, AS AN ESTIMATED 57
MILLION YOUNG KIDS ARE STILL NOT
IN SCHOOL.
JAPAN IS ONE OF THE SUCCESS
STORIES: ITS STUDENTS ARE IN
SCHOOL 240 DAYS A YEAR-- 60 DAYS
MORE THAN THEIR AMERICAN
COUNTERPARTS.
STUDENTS THERE ALSO ARE TOP
PERFORMERS, AMONG INDUSTRIALIZED
NATIONS IN READING, MATH, AND
SCIENCE.
HERE IS A LOOK AT ONE JAPANESE
CHILD'S EXPERIENCE FROM PRE-
SCHOOL TO HIGH SCHOOL
GRADUATION.
>> (translated): BASEBALL'S
TAUGHT ME TO APPRECIATE MY
PARENTS, MY MENTORS, AND MY
FELLOW TEAMMATES.
THAT'S SOMETHING I LEARNED IN
ELEMENTARY, MIDDLE AND HIGH
SCHOOL.
>> Reporter: KEN HIGASHIGUCHI IS
SIX YEARS OLD AND LIVES WITH HIS
MOTHER AND FATHER IN NARA,
JAPAN, A NATION COMMITTED TO
HAVING A FULLY LITERATE SOCIETY.
NEARLY EVERY CHILD IN JAPAN GOES
TO SCHOOL.
AND TODAY, LIKE KEN, THOUSANDS
OF SIX YEAR OLDS ARE PREPARING
TO ATTEND THEIR OPENING DAY
CEREMONY.
>> (translated): I HAVE TO
WEAR THIS FOR A WHOLE HOUR?
IT'S EMBARRASSING.
>> WE WANT TO GIVE KEN A LOT OF
CHANCES, A LOT OF OPPORTUNITIES.
THE MOST IMPORTANT THING IS FOR
KEN TO BE HAPPY FOR HIS LIFE.
>> Reporter: TODAY, KEN JOINS
THE RANKS OF STUDENTS WHO FOLLOW
A LONG, WELL-PLANNED JOURNEY
THROUGH ONE OF THE MOST
SUCCESSFUL SCHOOL SYSTEMS IN THE
WORLD, AND ONE OF THE MOST
DEMANDING.
UNLIKE HIS COUNTERPARTS IN MUCH
OF THE WORLD, KEN IS WELL
PREPARED FOR FIRST GRADE.
HE HAS BEEN IN STATE-FUNDED DAY
CARE SINCE THE AGE OF ONE.
>> HOW ARE YOU?
>> I'M FINE, THANK YOU.
HOW ARE YOU?
>> Reporter: ALONG WITH MANY
JAPANESE SCHOOL CHILDREN, KEN
ATTENDS PRIVATE AFTER-SCHOOL
CLASSES KNOWN AS "JUKU SCHOOLS."
KEN'S PARENTS ARE PUSHING HIM TO
GET THE BEST EDUCATION POSSIBLE,
BUT THE HOURS ARE LONG AND THE
EXPECTATIONS ARE HIGH.
BOTH OF KEN'S PARENTS WORK FULL
TIME, BUT THEY DEVOTE THEIR
WEEKENDS TO THEIR ONLY CHILD,
OFTEN DOING WHAT KEN, NOW NINE,
LOVES MOST: PLAYING BASEBALL.
>> (translated): SO FAR HE
LIKES EVERYTHING, INCLUDING
SPORTS, STUDYING, AND PLAYING
AROUND.
I THINK HE FEELS THAT IF HE
MAKES THE EFFORT, HE CAN DO
ANYTHING.
>> Reporter: KEN IS NOW IN THIRD
GRADE AT SAHO ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
AND OFTEN ARRIVES EARLY TO PLAY
WITH HIS FRIENDS.
AFTER DECADES OF IMPOSING
STRINGENT STANDARDS AND AN 11-
MONTH SCHOOL YEAR, JAPAN HAS
DROPPED SATURDAYS FROM THE
SCHOOL WEEK.
BUT ONE THING HASN'T CHANGED:
TEACHING TEAMWORK, THE HALLMARK
OF THE JAPANESE WORKFORCE.
>> (translated): I HAVE 30
STUDENTS, AND I'D LIKE FOR THEM
TO DO SOMETHING TOGETHER
CONTINUOUSLY.
THAT'S HOW WE STARTED SKIPPING
ROPE TOGETHER ONCE A WEEK FOR A
YEAR BACK IN APRIL.
>> Reporter: TODAY THEIR GOAL IS
TO ACHIEVE 1,000 CONSECUTIVE
JUMPS.
>> (translated): YOU GUYS
JUMPED 300 MORE THAN THE TIME
BEFORE.
DO YOU KNOW WHY WE WERE DOING
THIS?
>> (translated): WHEN I GROW
UP, I WANT TO BE A PROFESSIONAL
BASEBALL PLAYER, OR A SCHOOL
TEACHER.
WHEN I STARTED I DIDN'T KNOW HOW
TO CATCH OR THROW OR HOLD THE
BAT.
>> Reporter: AT 12, KEN IS
FINISHING SIXTH GRADE AND TRYING
HIS BEST TO BALANCE HIS LOVE OF
SPORTS AND HIS NEED TO STUDY.
>> (translated): HE READS IN
THE PAPER AND THE NEWS ABOUT
OTHER KIDS IN OTHER COUNTRIES.
HE THINKS GOING TO SCHOOL AND
PLAYING WITH FRIENDS ARE A
GIVEN.
AND HAVING MEALS EVERY DAY IS A
I THINK THAT AT A CONSCIOUS
LEVEL HE UNDERSTANDS THE REALITY
THAT THERE ARE KIDS HIS AGE, WHO
CAN'T GO TO SCHOOL AND HAVE TO
WORK IN ORDER TO SURVIVE.
I JUST DON'T KNOW HOW MUCH HE
UNDERSTANDS THAT EMOTIONALLY.
I THINK THAT'S WHAT HE'LL HAVE
TO LEARN AS HE GETS OLDER.
>> Reporter: KEN IS 18 YEARS OLD
AND HAS NEVER MISSED A SINGLE
DAY OF SCHOOL.
>> (translated): SCHOOL IS A
PLACE WHERE YOU CAN REALLY
EXPAND YOUR KNOWLEDGE, AND WHERE
YOU CAN ALSO MEET NEW PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: KEN IS ABOUT TO
GRADUATE FROM HIGH SCHOOL AND
START COLLEGE, CARRYING ON A
TRADITION OF DISCIPLINE, AND
TEAMWORK, WHICH HE MASTERED AS
CAPTAIN OF HIS BASEBALL TEAM.
TODAY THE WHOLE SCHOOL COMMUNITY
IS HERE FOR KEN'S LAST GAME.
>> (translated): PLAYING
BASEBALL HAS TAUGHT ME THE
IMPORTANCE OF MOTIVATING THE
TEAM, NOT ONLY BY WHAT I SAY BUT
ALSO BY WHAT I DO.
>> Reporter: KEN'S TEAM LOSES
THE GAME.
HIS TIRELESS FOCUS ON TRAINING
MAKES THE LOSS ESPECIALLY
DIFFICULT.
>> (translated): WE REALLY
WANTED TO WIN, SO I TRIED HARD
TO PULL THE TEAM TOGETHER, BUT
STILL IT SEEMS IT WASN'T ENOUGH.
NEXT YEAR, THE TEAM WILL
CONTINUE TO DO THEIR BEST.
>> (translated): WHENEVER HE
WAS HAVING A HARD TIME, I SAW
HIM GATHER THE STRENGTH TO MOVE
ON, AND THEN I WAS ABLE TO GAIN
THAT STRENGTH TOO.
>> (translated): LEARNING NOT
TO RUN AWAY FROM DIFFICULT
SITUATIONS HAS DEFINITELY BEEN
MY BIGGEST ACHIEVEMENT.
>> Reporter: KEN ALSO LEARNED
LESSONS FROM THE TRAGEDY THAT
STRUCK JAPAN IN 2011: THE
EARTHQUAKE AND TSUNAMI THAT
CLAIMED 16,000 LIVES.
KEN TRAVELED WITH HIS MOTHER THE
400 MILES FROM HIS HOME TO THE
DAMAGED REGION.
STUDENTS AT KEN'S SCHOOL
GATHERED FUNDS FOR THE EFFORT
AND SENT CARE PACKAGES.
>> (translated): I WAS IN
STUDENT GOVERNMENT FOR TWO
YEARS.
DURING THAT TIME, THE GREAT
EARTHQUAKE HAPPENED.
WE RAISED MONEY AND CAME UP WITH
NEW IDEAS.
THAT'S HOW WE CONTRIBUTED.
>> (translated): HE DOESN'T
COMPROMISE AND DOESN'T LET
HIMSELF OFF EASY.
I BELIEVE THIS IS THE MAN HE IS
TRYING TO BECOME.
>> (translated): I THINK WE
CREATED A GOOD ENVIRONMENT FOR
HIM TO BE ABLE TO SUCCEED AT
WHAT HE WANTED TO DO.
>> Reporter: KEN IS NOW OFF TO
COLLEGE NEAR HIS HOME.
HE WILL STUDY TO BE A PHYSICAL
EDUCATION TEACHER AND WILL TRY
TO BRING THE LESSONS OF TEAMWORK
AND CONCERN FOR OTHERS TO FUTURE
GENERATIONS.
♪ ♪
>> (translated): I THINK THE
FIRST STEP IS TO PUT OUR WORDS
INTO ACTIONS, AND THEN WE CAN
HAVE A POSITIVE IMPACT ON THOSE
AROUND US.
THAT'S THE KIND OF PERSON I WANT
TO BE.
>> Sreenivasan: LOOK UP IN THE
SKY TONIGHT, AND YOU MAY SEE A
RARE "SUPERMOON" TOTAL LUNAR
ECLIPSE.
THE SUN, EARTH, AND A FULL MOON
WILL BE IN A STRAIGHT LINE,
MAKING THE MOON, IN ITS CLOSING
POINT OF ORBIT, APPEAR MUCH
BRIGHTER THAN USUAL, EVEN RED-
ORANGE.
THIS PHENOMENON HASN'T HAPPENED
IN 33 YEARS AND WON'T AGAIN FOR
ANOTHER 18.
FOR SOME INSIGHT, YESTERDAY I
SPOKE WITH NEWSHOUR SCIENCE
CORRESPONDENT MILES O'BRIEN.
WHY IS THIS SO SIGNIFICANT
FOR PEOPLE?
>> WHEN THE MOON TURNS BIG,
14% BIGGER AS IT DOES DURING
THIS SO-CALLED SUPERMOON, THE
MOON'S ORBIT IS NOT CIRCULAR,
IT'S ELLIPTICAL.
THIS IS ITS CLOSEST POINT, AND
THEN ON TOP OF THAT YOU
GET A TOTAL ECLIPSE, THIS IS
THE FOURTH IN A SO-CALLED LUNAR
TETRAD THAT BEGAN.
FOUR ECLIPSES IN A ROW.
PEOPLE START THINKING THINGS
ARE GOING CRAZY.
WHY DOES IT TURN RED ORANGE,
WHAT IS THAT ABOUT?
>> WHEN YOU SEE AN ECLIPSE
OF THE SUN, THE MOON IS
PASSING FROM THE SUN AND YOU
GET THAT DARK DISK.
IT TAKES A BITE OUT OF THE
SUN AS IT WERE.
IN THIS CASE, THE EARTH IS
ECLIPSING THE SUN'S RAYS ON
TO THE MOON.
THE MOON HAS IN LIGHT OF ITS
OWN, IT'S REFLECTED LIGHT.
WHAT HAPPENS IS, THINK OF IT,
THE COLORS YOU SEE AT SUNSET,
AS THE LIGHT GOES THROUGH
THE ATMOSPHERE OF EARTH, IT
GETS BOUNCED AROUND,
SEPARATED, RETRACTED AND
WHAT ENDS UP SHINING ON TO
THE MOON AN GETTING TO THE
MOON IS THE RED RANGE OF
LIGHT.
AND THAT'S WHY YOU SEE THAT
KIND OF REDDISH ORANGE.
NOW IF YOU ARE A TOTAL PRO,
LOOK AT THE BEGINNING AND
THE END.
THIS IS A LITTLE BIT LIKE
LOOKING FOR THE GREEN FLASH
WHEN ARE YOU LOOKING FOR THE
SUNSET AM WILL YOU SEE A
BLUE OR VIOLET BAND THAT
WILL APPEAR THERE BECAUSE AS
THE SUN PASSES THROUGH THE
OZONE LAYER ON EARTH, IT
RETRACTS SLIGHTLY
DIFFERENTLY AND YOU GET A
BLUE TOCHBLT GET BINOCULARS
OUT AT THE BEGINNING AND END
AND YOU MIGHT CATCH THAT
BLUE BAND.
>> UNLIKE THE SOLAR ECLIPSE,
THIS IS TOTALLY SAFE TO SEE.
>> IT'S GREAT, THE BEST VIEWING
BECAUSE YOU DON'T HAVE TO WORRY
ABOUT LOOKING STRAIGHT AT THE
MOON.
IT'S ALL REFLECTED.
YOU DON'T HAVE TO HAVE
BINOCULARS, YOU CAN JUST GO
OUT AND ENJOY IT AND IT'S
TOTALLY IN PRIME TIME FOR
THE EAST COAST OF THE U.S.,
ASSUME NOTHING CLOUD COVER,
WILL YOU GET QUITE A SHOW.
>> ABOUT 10 TO 11 ON THE
EAST COAST AND THAT MEANS
ABOUT 7:00 ON THE WEST
COAST.
>> YEAH, BY THE TIME THE
MOONRISES ON THE WEST COAST,
IT WILL ALREADY BE UNDER WAY
BUT THEY WILL STILL GET A
SHOW THERE.
THE FULL PRIME TIME SHOW
WILL BE ON THE EAST COAST.
AND YOU KNOW, THE WHOLE
THING REALLY BEGINS AROUNDED
8:00 P.M., HOUR, ALL THE WAY
INTO MIDNIGHT BUT THE ACTUAL
PEAK OF IT WILL BE 10 P.M.
EASTERN TIME ON THE EAST
COAST.
AND IT'S WORTH A LOOK.
AND IF YOU HAPPEN TO BE IN
AN AREA WHERE IT'S
INCLUDEDDY, AND THESE THINGS
HAPPEN, THERE'S ABOUT THREE
OR FOUR PLACES ON-LINE WHERE
YOU CAN SEE STREAMING
WEBCAST, NASA TV IS DOING IT,
SKY AND TELESCOPE, SLEW IS
DOING IT, YOU WILL BE ABLE
TO SEE IT ONE WAY OR ANOTHER.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT IS IT
ABOUT THIS THAT FASCINATES
US?
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN FASCINATED
BY ECLIPSES FOR AS LONG AS
HISTORY HAS BEEN WRITTEN.
>> OH MY GOD, SOMETHING
STOPPED THE UPON OR
SOMETHING CHANGED THE COLOR
OF THE SUN WHAT HAPPENED?
>> SCIENCE HAS FILLED IN A
LOT OF BLANKS FOR US IN
RECENT YEARS.
WE KNOW THAT THIS IS SIMPLY
AN ALIGNMENT OF PLANETS AND
WHEN THE ORBITS LINE UP IN A
CERTAIN WAY THE SUN, EARTH
AN MOON LINE UP PERFECTLY,
YOU GET THIS.
THAT MAKES IT SOUND KIND OF
CLINICAL BUT BEFORE WE KNEW
A LOT ABOUT THIS, THESE WERE
LOOKED AT AS OMENS.
ECLIPSES IN PARTICULAR HAVE
ALWAYS BEEN LOOKED AT AS
SOME INDICATION THAT
SOMETHING USUALLY BAD IS
GOING TO HAPPEN.
SO I THINK WE KNOW
SCIENTIFICALLY THAT ISN'T
NECESSARILY THE CASE.
BUT THERE'S STILL PEOPLE OUT
THERE WHO WORRY.
>> RIGHT, MILES O'BRIEN,
SCIENCE CORRESPONDENT FOR
THE PBS NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU
FOR JOINING US.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: JUST IN TIME FOR
SUNDAY'S RARE SUPERMOON TOTAL
LUNAR ECLIPSE, LEARN EIGHT
THINGS YOU MAY KNOW ABOUT THE
MOON.
VISIT US ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: YESTERDAY, WE
REPORTED THE COMING RELEASE OF
SHAKER AAMER, A BRITISH LEGAL
RESIDENT WHO HAS BEEN HELD AT
THE U.S. MILITARY PRISON IN
GUANTANAMO BAY, CUBA WITHOUT
CHARGES FOR THE PAST 13 YEARS.
HE IS EXPECTED TO BE FREED IN
THE NEXT 30 DAYS.
ITN'S ROHIT KACHROO HAS MORE ON
HIS STORY.
NO TRIAL, NO CHARGE, NO
REASON SAID HIS FAMILY FOR
HIS 13 YEARS OF DETENTION.
>> I DO NOT BELIEVE UNTIL I
SEE HIM.
EVEN WHEN I SEE HIM, THEN I
THINK I CAN KNOW IT IS THE
TRUE PERSON, RIGHT PERSON OR
SOMEONE ELSE.
REALLY.
>> AT HOME HIS FAMILY, A SON
BORN WHO HE NEVER MET.
>> SIX FEDERAL AGENCIES
UNANIMOUSLY SAID YEARS AGO
THAT SHAKER SHOULD GO HOME
TO HIS WIFE AND KIDS SO,
WHILE WE'RE REALLY GRATEFUL
FOR DAVID CAMERON FOR HAVING
RAISED SHAKER'S CASE WITH
OBAMA, THERE WILL BE A LOT
OF QUESTIONS.
>> HE WAS CAPTURED IN 2001
IN AV GANG STAND AND HANDED
OVER TO U.S. FORCES.
HE WAS TRANSFERED TO
GUANTANAMO A YEAR LATER
ACCUSED OF WORKING FOR AL
QAEDA.
THERE HIS LAWYERS CLAIM HE
WAS BEATEN AND TORTURED.
IN 2007 AFTER A DIRECT
REQUEST FROM THE BRITISH
GOVERNMENT, HE WAS CLEARED
FOR RELEASE ALONG WITH FOUR
OTHER U.K. PRISONERS.
AND TWO YEARS LATER HE WAS
CLEARED AGAIN.
BUT DESPITE THAT, THERE WERE
SOME CONCERNS IN WASHINGTON
ABOUT HIS EMINENT RELEASE
-- IMMINENT RELEASE.
>> I BELIEVE HE IS A VERY
DANGEROUS PERSON.
I'M CONCERNED THAT IF HE
WERE RELEASED, AS MY
UNDERSTANDING OF THE RESULT
WOULD BE, HE WOULD BE SET
FREE AND COULD RECEIVE A
FINANCIAL WINDFALL, EVEN.
>> AFTER HIS 13 MISSING
YEARS, SO MUCH ABOUT HIS
CASE, AND THE ALLEGATIONS
AGAINST HIM, ARE STILL UNKNOWN.
ITV NEWS.
>> Sreenivasan: BEFORE WE LEAVE
YOU TONIGHT, A LOOK AT THE
HUGE CROWD POPE FRANCIS HAS
DRAWN AT HIS FINAL PUBLIC EVENT
IN THE U.S.
THE CROWD ESTIMATED AT
850,000 CATHOLICS AND THE
CURIOUS HAS FILLED BENJAMIN
FRANKLIN PARKWAY, THE ROAD
LEADING TO THE MUSEUM OF ART
WHERE THE POPE IS LEADING AN
OPEN AIR MASS.
HE RETURNS TO VATICAN CITY
TONIGHT.
THAT IS IT FOR THIS EDITION
OF PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, THANKS
FOR WATCHING.